in this video let us learn how to perform the
enqueue operation in a circular
queue
First let us taken integer array of size three and
initialised the front and rear pointer as minus one
Now let us enqueue element 10 as usual
In the enqueue operation we increment the rear pointer and
insert given value
So circular increment the rear pointer and placed the value
10 so rear will become rear plus one mod size
Here the value of rear is minus one and value
of size is three so it will become rear equal
to minus one plus one mod three
It will be zero mod three which is zero so
the value of rear pointer will be zero
So place the Element 10 in array of rear that
is array of zero since it is the first element
we need to set the front pointer to zero which
will be useful to check
The queue empty case that's it performed the circular
increment on the rear Pointer and placed the value in
array of rear and for the first element alone set
front as zero
Now let us enqueue Element 20
Similarly perform circular increment on the rear Pointer it will
become zero plus one mod three which will be one
mod three and the value of one mod three is
one so placed the value 20 in array of one
Now let us enqueue one more element 30 Similarly
perform circular increment on rear pointer it will become
one plus One mod three which will be two mod
three and the value of two mod three is two
so placed the value 30 in array of two
Now the queue is full so we can't perform the
enqueue operation here The value of front is zero and the value
of rear is two which is size minus one
So when front is equal to zero and Rear is equal to size
minus one we can say that the queue is full
Let us note this condition
We will use this in the implementation
Now let us dequeue one element
We will learn the dequeue
operation elaboratly in the next video as of
now just dequeue one element
So what will happen in dequeue operation We will
move the front pointer and returned the value So here
the front pointer will move to the next index
An element 10 will be dequeued from the queue
Now we have one empty space so we can
enqueue one element here
now let us enqueue Element 40 so perform circular increment
on rear pointer
The value of rear pointer is twwo so it will
become two plus one mod three which will be three
mod three and the value of three mod three is zero
So placed the value 40 in array of zero
We can say that the reappointed adjust itself circularly
when it reaches the end of the queue
That's why it is called a circular
queue
After the insertion of 40
the queue is full again we can't perform enqueue operation here
The value of front is one and the value of
rear is zero
That is rear is one indicts behind
The front point of that is when rear are equal
to front  minus one
We can say that queue is full
We should also include this condition as well in the
queue
Full check
So not this condition as well so the logic for
enqueue operation is very simple
First check
Whether the queue is full or not if it is
full just written otherwise performs circular increment on the rear
Pointer and placed the value for the first enqueue operation
set front as zero
Let us quickly implement the enqueue operation write a function
named enqueue which takes one integer argument
val Val is the value which should be inserted into
the queue this function won't written anything so write
It's return type as void
First we need to check whether the queue is full
or not
So write If isQueuefull if the queue is full we
can't insert the element so
print queue is full
If the queue is not full we can insert the
value
For that we need to perform a circular increment on
the rear pointer so write rear equal to rear plus
one mod size
And then we need to place the value in array
of rear
So write array of rear equal to val we have
almost completed the logic
We just need to check one more case here
When we insert the first element we need to set
the value front zero So write if front equal to
minus one front  equal to zero
that's it we have implemented the logic for enqueue operation
Now let us quickly implement the isQueuefull function
This function will check whether the queue is full or
not
If it is full it will return true
Otherwise it will return
false so let us write
A function named isQueuefull with return type as bool
We have already discussed two Queue full cases
One is when front
equal to 0 and rear equal to size minus one
And the second one is when rear equal to
front minus one that is rear pointer
is one index behind the front pointer
For these two cases we need to return
True
So write if front  equal to 0 and rear equal
to size minus one
Return true
And if rear equal to front minus 1
return true
Otherwise the queue
is not full
So we need to return False
So in the end just returned False
that's it in this video we have learned the
enqueue operation and its implementation
In the next video we will learn the dequeue operation and its implementation.